---
layout: post
title:      "UX to Data: Not Too Different "
date:       2020-01-06 08:07:55 +0000
permalink:  ux_to_data_not_too_different
---



A little less than 10 years ago, I started my college search, trying to figure out which field I wanted to dive into for the rest of my life. Just a year before, I had my hopes set on becoming an International Lawyer, working for Interpol or the CIA. After a year of Mock Trial, it became painfully clear that Law wasn't something I was willing to commit to. Suddenly, after years of thinking I had everything planned out, I had to start from square one.

A few weeks later, my grandmother asked me for help with her iPhone 4. What she asked for was simple enough: it should just be a simple change in the settings. Except it wasn't. I went to the internet and found that, in just the few weeks since it was released, entire forums had already been filled regarding the exact same lack of accessibility. It didn't make sense. In that moment, I decided I wanted to change that.

I took to the internet and eventually found about a relatively "new" field called Engineering Psychology which focused on applying human factors to technology. Coincidentally, I get an invitation to apply to a university with that exact program, the next day. A few months later, I accepted my offer and began to think of all the ways I could use human factors. Though I originally wanted to focus on design physical tech, like smartphones, I decided to focus on the everchanging, ever verstile software, taking my first steps into User Experience. I took an interest in Machine Learning, connected devices, and how Human-Computer Interactions would change as computer and humans began to behave more alike. During my second year, I started to take on my first UX research and design projects, choosing to freelance as a consultant to get some experience in my belt. But, after 7 years, I became disillusioned with what I was doing, specifically when it came to clients undervaluing my work. Unfortunately, that was common in UX.


UX, with my background, was an interdisciplinary mix of behavioral sciences, statistical research, nueroscience, and design theory. It was this background that allowed me to increase engagement, Investor attention, and revenue, sometimes by millions. Even with that track record, however, I was too often undervalued and underutilized. I either needed support from the companies I worked with or I needed a change. Since it was evident that the lack of support would remain a norm, I decide a change was needed. I thought taking up software engineering would be the easier path. Not only do I work with and manage engineering teams on a regular basis, I had a fair bit of programming experience. Probably more than I'v eever given myself credit for. However, no matter how many times I tried, I couldn't shake the feeling that something was missing. I wasn't solving the same kind of complex problems that drew me to UX. There was less data, less research, and less understanding of the problems and the solutions. So I put the change on hold.

In April 2019, I shifted from consulting to a full-time employment for the first time in my 7 year career. It was for a company who offered a AI-based Software as a Service and it was the first time I worked with a dedicated, on-site Data Science team. It wasn't my first time working with Data Science, but it was the first time working with a time that focused on AI and Machine Learning. As the UX Designer, it was my job to understand how the product worked, more so than anyone else. I would be the one conceptualizing, planning, designing, and leading the implementation of all future features which meant I needed to understand the underlying data and behavior models, where we got the data from, and the processes that each data point went from collection to the final client report. I expected to be extremely lost, but I soon found out that the approaches Data Science took to building our models was nearly the same as the approaches to research and statistics I've been using for the last 7 years.

During the few months with this startup, I teamed up with Data Science trying to find ways to eliminate bias, specifically racial bias, in our behavioral models, while also helping build new, more exact models for our users. I finally found the fit I was looking for. I found a way to shift into a more technical role without sacrificing the kind of problems I loved to solve. Most importantly, I still had the opportunity to advocate for users by finding ways to eliminate bias within the software, something that was often detriminental to people who looked like me.

As a full-time employee, I was hoping this would be an opportunity for me to grow with a team, something consultants are rarely afforded. After 6 months, that hope was all but ripped apart after I was let go. The company wanted a full-time UX Designer, but they failed to plan for it. In just 6 months, my work gained the startup three of its largest clients, all of whom were unlikely to sign contracts with the designs and prototypes I conceptualized and lead. My last few projects were projects I specifically proposed and I noticed that development of features I already completed were far behind schedule. At first, I was simply a sprint ahead, per usual. Then, after having to take a two week medical problem, I was surprised to come back and learn that I was no two sprints ahead of engineering, despite not having be in for most of the last two sprints. Soon that one month gap turned into two, then three, then suddenly features I designed at the beginning of Q3 2019 were set for development in Q2 of 2020.

In October, when I was out with a stomach flu, I had a call with the CEO where I was let go because I was too good at my job. The role was completely dissolved. I would be getting paid through the end of the week plus a tiny two week severence. I was shown fake concern about medical issues, which were caused by an incident at this same company, knowing that I was about to be out a job. Before they even had a chance to tell me, they closed all of my accounts, including the Google Hangout account I was using during the call. I was sick, out of a job, and out of money. 

I was looking at months of interviewing with recruiters and hiring managers for UX roles who knew absolutely nothing about UX. I was looking at the possibility that, once again, I would be hired by a company that refused to be transparent about having not planned ahead. I couldn't go through this process, again. I couldn't handle having to do all of this over again in another 6 months. I couldn't ignore the need for a change, again.
