---
layout: post
title:      "Can Machine Learning Eliminate Racial Disparities in Medicine?"
date:       2020-06-17 16:59:13 +0000
permalink:  can_machine_learning_eliminate_racial_disparities_in_medicine
---


Ask almost any Black American seeking medical assistance and they have at least one story about how they receive beyond subpar care from a physician. In fact, unless they have a dedicated, and usually Black, general physician, chances are every experience they've had is negative.

While the issue has been around for hundreds of years, thanks to platforms like Tiktok, more physicians have come out to say that medicine has a long history of anti-Black racism that heavily contributes to the [highest rates of maternal mortality](https://www.nbcnews.com/health/womens-health/u-s-finally-has-better-maternal-mortality-data-black-mothers-n1125896/), [extremely disproportionate rates of Covid-19 infection and death](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/racial-ethnic-minorities.html), and the lowest rates of [receiving proper healthcare from the same doctors and hospitals as the other demographics of the general population](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/13/upshot/race-and-medicine-the-harm-that-comes-from-mistrust.html). In fact, in a [2016 survey assessing racist beliefs of medical students and residents](https://www.aamc.org/news-insights/how-we-fail-black-patients-pain), at least half of those surveyed believe racist medical myths which lead to low quality health care, higher instances of treatable chronic disease such as heart disease and diabetes, and using far less anasthesia or pain medication for surgerical procedures. These beliefs include Black people having thicker skin, feeling less pain because we have fewer/less sensitive nerve endings, or that Black people have extra bio-physical structures than White people. To further ingrain racial disparities in medicine, examples of most illnesses with outward symptoms, such as signs of melanoma, are almost exclusively shown on white-skinned or slightly tanned bodies, contributing to a 65% rate of survival rates for Black patients compared to a 91% rate for White patients. The question is: can machine learning successfully close the racial disparities in medicine for Black patients? It depends, but so far the answer is a resounding "NO!"

Unfortunately, any machine learning model is subject to the same biases the modeler and the data hold. In fact, [millions of Black patients are already victim to bias health-care algorithms](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-03228-6) in a system that already leaves Black patients with larger medical debt in exchange for lower quality care. While machine learning and things like image classification, which should provide more objective evidence of identifiable symptoms, seems like great ways to improve the quality in care amongst all races with the same cost, the same races myth and tendencies that systemic infect medicine also infect data science. Computer vision carries over legacy artifacts from its photography forefather which rarely takes in consideration non-White skin tones. Recommendation models are only as good as the quality and accuracy of data used to train and test it. Image classifcation models have relied heavily on non-Black patients, so existing models fail to consider overlapping health conditions that disproportionally affect Black patients and contribute to higher rates of misdiagnosis.

One required solution is to increase racial diversity; not only in data but in modelers, too. In nearly 8 years of experience, I have seen first hand how Black users or audiences are rarely considered in the development of AI and health-care products, even in issues that mostly affect Black people. I'm usually the one who has to introduce those use cases. But, as the only Black person consulted in over 14+ startups and companies (one of which was an international, billion dollar corporation), my contribution is simply not enough. If more Black modelers were included from inception, we could eliminate much more bias before models even launch in comparison to models made by largely White and Asian teams. More Black men, women, and nonbinary inclusion in data science might be able to contribute to systemic changes in how data science works, though we can't do it alone. Our non-Black counterparts have to be willing to check their own biases.

Other solutions require changes in systemic medical racism. These racist myths didn't simply show up in 2016. They've existed for nearly 400 years in the U.S. and are still being taught by medical schools, residents, attendings, and practioners. While technology can help us improve healthcare, it can also widen a disparity that shouldn't exist in the first place.
